Date: Fri Jan 09 19:14:33 JST 2004

From: Piet Hut <piet@ias.edu>

Hi Jun:

I'm glad we got a chance to talk about things in detail today!

I'm going through some older messages.  This is from two days ago.
Did you get a chance to look at it?  This is something we will have
to solve, for the book writing; I can think of a few different ways to
do it.  Do you have a preference?

Piet
------- Start of forwarded message -------
Date: Wed, 7 Jan 2004 22:22:35 -0500
From: Piet Hut <piet@ias.edu>
To: makino@astron.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Subject: chapter 2

Hi Jun:

I'm very glad that we made so much progress, Tuesday.  gokurousama!

I added a little text at the end of chapter 2.  Could you have a look
at it?  I did not write much dialogue; I can do that soon after we
agree upon the direction.  As you can see, I now introduced an Nbody
class, and did some more tests.

There are a few questions in the codes that are listed.  For example,
shall we simple_print "write" and simple_read "read"?  We will use
those methods a lot, and those seem more natural.

Also, I introduced similar methods for using files rather than stdio
(maybe not really necessary at this point, but if not now, then soon);
how do you suggest to implement that?

Also, shall we "include Math" in the "body.rb" definition, so that we
don't always have to repeat it, or perhaps better in some "stdinc.rb"
include file, that can also have "NDIM = 3" in it, etc.?

Finally, at the end you will see an interesting use of your :command:
power, where I use two different files, test.rb and test-io.rb .
Note that I ran into the following problem: I had to put parentheses
"()" around the expression with redirection ">" in it, otherwise acsdoc
complained about "Ambiguous output redirect"; I'm sure it collides with
something you have written.  Would it be easy to add those "()" in
your acsdoc code as an extra protection level, so that I can leave
them out of the book text?

Another aspect: it would be most natural in the last example, and in a way
in all examples, to have an extra prompt "|gravity>" appear, to show that
you get *no* output in the last three lines, especially in the last line,
with the result of the "diff".

This last question is probably related to the question of how we can
use command line input (the one issue that remained unresolved Tuesday).

Piet
------- End of forwarded message -------

