
1. conversion from local note to global .not file

a) Basic idea: append the whole thing to the end of the global file

b) In the future, we want to remove the overlapping part, since it
would be handy to have, say the note for the last week (or month, or
year, or years) locally on the same file as the one you edit now.

c) At the least, you insert an identity flag for the appended content
before it is actually appended

d) There are a number of administrative things to decide:

d-1) Where to put the global file, and how to change the location if
     you want to change

d-2) what is the format for the header

d-3) we probably want to make subdirectory for each added session, so
     that we can add things like
       -- image files
       -- image files for equations
       -- forward pointers to future notes


Exactly what way we refer to past notes? In what format?

In other words, how we set identity of the note?

many possibilities:

 --- date + number
 --- date + time
 --- user-specified
 --- date+user-specified
 --- 

Points to consider:

We assume that we type in (we do not use any "HTML generater" to put
in the tag to the past note to the present note. So the identity must
be reasonably short and human-readable. date+time+second my be already
too long.

Header information would contain

--- Date
--- Time (down to second)
--- Name of the person

and, in addition to them, the id to be used for furture
reference. This id would also be used as the name for the subdirectory
to store additional informations.

Maintainance:

Basic idea:

--- each developer and system (acs@grape) have complete copy of everything
--- when one new labnote is committed, acs will update its local copy
    by svn update, and then execute the command to update global file
    (and html stuff)
    
Problem:  how we prevent a random user (like Jun or Piet) to mess up
the global file?

Simple answer: Since the global file itself is maintained by svn, you
do not care. You can recover the corrupted file from older svn
archive.

directory structure and name conventions

acs
 |
 |lab---- 200311----001
 |      |
 |      |
 |      |
 |      |--200312----
 |
 |
  |src
 
lab directory contains
 --- all top-level HTML files and mother .not file
 --- directory for each month

 directory for each month then contains
   --- each labnote file sequecened as 001-999
       these files have name xxx.not
   --- directory named 001 etc to store subsidary information
    
 