2003, December 25, Thursday, Kyoto: Jun, Piet

1. Literate Programming, Then and Now

We looked back on the literate programming tool by Norman Walsh, and
we realized that there were many modifications which we would need to
make, in order to use it for our book series.  For example, we would
want to produce many small code files, not one large code file; and
these code files would be of different types, some written in Ruby,
some in C, others would be Makefiles, etc.  In addition, we realized
that it might be rather difficult to add a literate programming source
file in emacs, since we would like to switch from, say, ruby mode to
xml mode, each time we would move from a code fragment to a text
fragment.

We then stepped back a bit more from the whole problem, and we asked
ourselves what really the core idea is behind literate programming,
independent of Knuth's implementation of mixing code and book text
into one file.  The spirit is: provide a mechanism to make it far more
likely to let authors update book and code in unison, i.e., as soon as
you add a few lines of code, it should be easy and actually inviting
to add a few lines of text to the book as well, to describe what you
did and how and why.

When Knuth invented literate programming, more than 25 years ago, he
was probably working with a very simple editor that could open only
one file at a time, and only view a relatively small portion of that
file.  Also, he was programming in Pascal, where the whole program is
stored in a single file.  Both reasons contributed to the single-file
orientation of the original literate programing idea.

Today, however, it is easy to open many files in many windows in the
same editor.  We want to stick to the spirit of literate programming,
namely to provide strong incentive and encouragement to keep text and
code in sync.  But the implementation can now be done most naturally
in a hypertext-type tree with pointers between the nodes and branches.
What is essential is the ease with which you are invited to jump from
text to code and back, independently of whether the actual text and
the actual code are part of the same file or not.

So much for ease of use.  As for providing more of a safety mechanism,
we are thinking of dividing each code source file into segments.  The
start of a segment is indicated by a comment line of a prescribed form
which includes the name of the segment.  A similar comment with the
word `end' indicates the end of that segment.  Segments can be nested,
but the top-level segments should together exactly cover the whole
source file.  We will design a mechanism as a wrapped around the svn
commit command that checks whether a code is fully covered, and if not
it will refuse to commit, giving a `segmentation fault' instead.

As an additional safety layer, we will require each segment to be
pointed to, from at least one place somewhere in the book(s) we are
writing about the code.  As a minimum, someone would be forced to
write `this part of the code is not (yet) documented' before being
able to commit the whole thing to svn.  It should not be too hard to
write a wrapper script like that.

Although we consider us to follow the spirit of literate programming,
it is probably better to use a different name, given that our
implementation is almost the opposite of that chosen by Knuth.
Therefore we will refer to our proposed system as coherent
programming.

2. rdoc

We decided to use rdoc ("rdoc.sourceforge.net"), a ruby documentation
system written in ruby by David Thomas, one of the pragmatic programmers.
For now at least, we will use this system to write all our text: book
chapters, labnotes, and code.  We will have to make some modifications
to fit all our needs.  Some of this can be done by writing a preprocessor
for rdoc, other modifications will have to be added to the rdoc source
itself.  As a simple exercise, we wrote a script {\tt acsdoc.rb} that
translates commands like ":include code:" to "include:" with two extra
lines printed, above and below the code fragment.
