2003, December 19, Friday, Kyoto: Jun, Piet

1. Our Book Project: Guided Tours

We discussed at length how to set up our whole ACS book project.
A useful metaphor is a zoo: each chapter can be considered an
exhibition of one or more animals.  The zoo contains many exhibits,
but there is not one particular linear ordering in which to see the
exhibits.  Rather, a number of different guided tours can be defined,
and pointers for those tours can be provided.  One tour could highlight
the astrophysics, another one the code structure, yet another one would
be aimed at mathematicians or physicists interested in studying the
N-body problem by itself.

So instead of planning to write ten books, each with ten or so chapters,
we will concentrate on writing individual chapters without too much
concern of how it all fits together.  Rather, we will work towards the
next release of ACS version X.Y, and decide at each point where to go
next.  In due time, the zoo will grow, more exhibits will be added by
us and by others, and more tours will be defined, also by us and by
others.

2. Chapters

We made a list of groups/types of chapters that we can imagine to appear:

  Integrators, such as the Kali code

  Initial models, such as King models

  Analysis modules, such as Lagrangian radii

  Scattering packages

  Introductions, to gravitation, diff. eq., and numerical methods

  Labnotes and Docbook

  I/O

  Story mechanism, as in Starlab

  Ruby-C-Fortran interfaces and other utilities

  Graphics

  Experimentation Projects

3. Directory Structure

We chose a new directory structure for the svn-controlled acs site.
On the top level we now have:

  src: this contains a tree of chapters, with corresponding codes and
       manual pages

  doc: this contains automatically generated versions of the book chapters,
       in ps, pdf, and html format

  not: this contains a tree of directories where labnotes are deposited,
       one file for each session

  log: this contains automatically generated version of the lab notes,
       in ps, pdf, and html format

  bin: this contains all executables

We managed to transfer all files, using svn's capability to mv files
and even whole directories.  At some point something went wrong and
Piet's svn working copy became corrupted.  By checking out a new copy,
nothing turned out to be lost, and it was relatively easy to restore
everything.
