Date: Thu Jun 03 09:56:10 JST 2004

From: Piet Hut <piet@ias.edu>

Hi Jun:

How nice to get such a detailed reaction from Walter Dehnen,
and what interesting timing, just around the time that you
were setting up the new web site!

I'll answer him later today.  Is there anything you would like
me to add, or that you want to write to him directly?

By the way, I'm sending this email to the "not" part of acs,
since we decided to keep this for ourselves.  We probably still
want to be a bit cautious of what to write here, since it may
well become visible some day, somehow.

One issue which we haven't decided upon yet is: what do we do
when people spend some serious time improving our codes?  Some
options:

-- Do we ask them for their codes and put it up on our web site?

   The draw back is that it is mendokusai to exert quality control.
   Also, I don't particularly like to put up extra versions for our
   MSA volume, since then people are tempted to continue working on
   that, while we want to migrate them to Ruby.

-- Or do we ask them to put it up on their web site, with a
   pointer to that from our web site?

   This is easier for us, but also much more dangerous.  They can
   add all kind of `explanations', some of which go against our
   philosophy (Walter's email has already some aspects there).
   And by pointing to those pages, the reader may get the mistaken
   notion that we endorse all those ideas (people nowadays are very
   quick and lazy in reading and drawing conclusions).

-- Or do we just thank them, and stop there?

   This is even easier, but they may feel unhappy if we don't do
   anything with it.  Walter's email is a nice example for us, to
   think about right now: if I were him, I might be unhappy that we
   thank him politely but don't use his software, and don't even link
   to it; that would go against the whole feeling of open source
   collaborations.  And we certainly want to have him as a potential
   collaborator.

Hmmm.  Three options, each of them with serious drawbacks.

Perhaps for now the best thing is to politely answer him, and
say that we don't plan to extend the old version, that we want
to focus on the new one, and that we look forward to hear his
comments there?  And then of course I will react to the detailed
points he brought up.

What do you think?

Piet

