Date: Sun Feb 06 10:31:14 JST 2005

From: Piet Hut <piet@ias.edu>

Jun,

Well, I spent most of yesterday and today trying to remember what we
did in September.  It took me a while, but now I am on track again.
I should now be able to write the individual time step code development,
hopefully during the next few weeks.

So far I have writen a code "vol-4/nbody_cst1.rb" that does N-body
evolution with softening and constant time steps, for all of the
2-body algorithms that we have written: forward Euler, leapfrog,
Runge-Kutta 2nd order, Runge-Kutta 4th order, Yoshida 2nd, 4th, 6th
and 8th order, multistep 2n, 4th, 6th and 8th order and Hermite.
A nice set of choices, and useful as a backup, to check calculations
of individual time step codes!  Until today, we did not have one code
with all these algorithms in one file.  Several of them were not yet
translated from 2-body to N-body, in fact.

The code "vol-4/nbody_cst1.rb" does I/O in ACS format, but I will
write the dialogue starting with "vol-4/nbody_cst0.rb" which does
I/O in the old simple format.

I also wrote two conversion tools "vol-4/acs2sim.rb" and
"vol-4/sim2acs.rb" which do exactly what you think they should do.

Finally, I went through all of the old N-body versions that I could
find, and I renamed the most interestingly different ones as follows:

   nbody_cst1.rb      constant time steps

   nbody_sh1.rb       shared time steps

   nbody_ind1.rb      individual time steps

   nbody_ind2.rb      individual time steps

   nbody_ind3.rb      individual time steps

   world1.rb       wordline-based individual time steps

   world2.rb       wordline-based individual time steps

   world3.rb       wordline-based individual time steps

Note that the last one "vol-7a/world3.rb" is the same as the last
version of what we used to call "vol-13/world1.rb".

Finally, I remembered that you prefered to leave the name "kali1.rb"
for later; indeed, we agreed to keep using the "worldx" name longer.

Therefore, I have renamed our "kali1.rb" code, which we were
working on last month, "vol-7b/world4.rb" .
Note that "kali1rk.rb" is therefore now "vol-7b/world4rk.rb" ,
and "kali1rk2.rb" is therefore now "vol-7b/world4rk2.rb" ,

It will still be a lot of work to sort out more details, but at least
I have finally begun to clean things up, and I can now see the whole
landscape, for the first time, of what we have done in the last half
year.

Ah, yes, I have also taken the last chapter of vol-3a and put that as
the first chapter of vol-3b.  In this way, any application of our clop
stuff to N-body codes will be in vol-3b.  The name of vol-3b I have
therefore changed from "User Interface: More on Command Line Arguments"
to the more interesting title "User Interface: Applications" .

Piet

